# Humanistic Cognitive Science (HooCS) Lab

Cognitive Science is the interdisciplinary study of the mind. Over a half century ago, humanists and scientists established this field together, believing that we cannot uncover the mysteries of the human mind from within disciplinary silos. Yet cognitive scientists have recently documented a concerning trend: the field is retreating back to these silos (Núñez et al., 2019) at a historical moment that demands interdisciplinary research, as humanists and scientists grapple with the impacts of technologies such as AI and social media on human minds and societies. 

The Humanistic Cognitive Science (HooCS) Lab is a five-year project that will incubate UVA’s existing strengths to establish us as a leader in the interdisciplinary study of the mind. HooCS Lab will integrate what has so far been separate collaborations, and integrate them into a single vertically integrated team that will be more effective at training undergraduate and graduate students, producing research, and securing external funding. HooCS Lab will have six core faculty:

- Director: Zac Irving (Philosophy)
- Core Faculty: Trey Boone (Philosophy); David Danks (Philosophy and Data Science); Sheisha Kulkarni (McIntire); Jordan MacKenzie (Philosophy); Michael Sheehy (Contemplative Sciences Center)

Our current and future collaborations are organized around two related topics: 
- Spontaneity in an Anxious World: Spontaneous forms of thinking such as mind-wandering  play a far greater role in mental life than previously understood. Descriptively, spontaneity occupies up to half our waking thoughts, and plays a crucial role in the fields of network and resting state neuroscience. Normatively, spontaneity contributes to the good mental life, making us more creative, exploratory, and freeing us from our previous points of view. Yet various pressures within our modern world––including digital technologies and financial distress––leave us stuck in ruminative, obsessive thought patterns that crowd out spontaneity. Humanistic cognitive scientists at UVA are addressing these challenges in multiple ways: (1) creating more comprehensive models of the mind and brain that make room for spontaneity; (2) philosophically and empirically investigating how digital distractions and financial stress can make us less spontaneous; and (3) developing techniques to harness spontaneity, inspired both by contemplative traditions in Tibet and India and by machine learning techniques. 
- Human Agency and Autonomy in the Age of AI: How are AI systems such as large language models and recommender systems changing our understanding of our own agency and autonomy? Are the challenges to our agency and autonomy different than those that arose with previous technologies? What kinds of human-AI interaction patterns can increase our agency and autonomy rather than decrease it? How can these insights be applied to real-world contexts such as medicine and teaching? And do AI systems have autonomy and agency themselves? 
Our track record gives us a high likelihood of success:
- Training: 13 PhD Students (2 placed in TT Jobs); 6 undergraduates (3 placed in top PhDs)
- Grant funding: Amazon (Research Award); DARPA; NEH (Dangers and Opportunities of Technology); SSHRC; NBER; NSF (ARIA Research Institute); Templeton World Charity Foundation
- Potential funders: Dana Neuroscience Foundation; Institute for Humane Studies; John Templeton Foundation; Tiny Blue Dot Foundation; Templeton World Charity Foundation; NBER; Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada; UNC PPE Research Consortium
